projects.rst, before:

public: yes

Projects
========

Over the last couple of years I worked on a number of open source
projects.  Most of them were Python, a couple of others however were also
C, PHP or other languages mixed in.

Projects I've founded are marked with stars (‘*’), others are project I
joined.  Projects where I helped out for a short period of time are marked
with a dagger (‘†’).

Open Source Libraries
---------------------

-   `Pygments <http://pygments.pocoo.org/>`_ — syntax highlighter written in Python.  *2005-*
-   `Jinja <http://jinja.pocoo.org/>`_ — template engine for Python.  *2006-*
-   `Ruty <http://ruty.rubyforge.org/>`_ — a port of Django templates to Ruby.  *2007*
-   `Twig <http://www.twig-project.org/>`_ — a Django-inspired template
    engine for PHP (basic implementation, now part of Symphony)
-   `phpserialize <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/phpserialize>`_ —
    implementation of the PHP serialization for Python. *2007*
-   `Sphinx <http://sphinx.pocoo.org/>`_ — a Python documentation tool.  *2007-*
-   `Werkzeug <http://werkzeug.pocoo.org/>`_ — WSGI utility library for Python.  *2007-* *
-   `Babel <http://babel.edgewall.org/>`_ — collection of tools for
    internationalizing Python applications.  *2008-* *
-   `CleverCSS <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/CleverCSS>`_ — CSS toolkit for Python, *2009-* *
-   `GHRML <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/GHRML>`_ — HAML inspired template
    engine based on Genshi for Python.  *2009* *
-   `Flask <http://flask.pocoo.org/>`_ — a microframework for Python based
    on good intentions.  *2010-* *

*small contribtions and libraries are not listed*

Open Source Applications
------------------------

-   `Zine <http://zine.pocoo.org/>`_ — a blog software written in Python. *2007-* *
-   `MoinMoin <http://moinmo.in>`_ — wiki engine written in Python. *2008* †
-   `Plurk Solace <http://opensource.plurk.com/solace/>`_ — a multilingual support application. *2009-*

Websites
--------

-   `ubuntuusers.de <http://www.ubuntuusers.de/>`_ — many parts of the current running software. *2004-*
-   `Pocoo <http://dev.pocoo.org/>`_ — the project websites with some exceptions. *2005-*
-   `Architekten Ronacher <http://architekten-ronacher.at/>`_ — design and backend. *2009*

Projects for Competitions
-------------------------

-   `“Be a Bee” <http://www.aec.at/prix_history_en.php?year=2003>`_ — for u19, Ars Electronica 2003. 2nd Place. *2003*

Commercial Projects
-------------------

-   `Plurk <http://www.plurk.com/>`_ — a microblogging platform. *2008-2009*

Talks
-----

-   `Good API Design <http://www.scribd.com/doc/39946553/Good-API-Design>`_
    @ Pycon Ukraine 2010 (`recording <http://uapycon.blip.tv/file/4399505/>`_)
-   `Python Idioms <http://www.scribd.com/doc/39946630/Python-Idioms>`_
    @ Pycon Poland 2010
-   `Flask Lighting Talk <http://www.scribd.com/doc/31933682/Flask>`_ @ djangocon.eu 2010
-   `WSGI on Python 3 <http://dev.pocoo.org/~mitsuhiko/djangocon-wsgi.pdf>`_
    @ djangocon.eu 2010
-   `Python 3 <http://dev.pocoo.org/~mitsuhiko/python3-linuxtage.pdf>`_
    @ Linuxtage 2010 Graz
-   `Solace <http://dev.pocoo.org/~mitsuhiko/solace-pdxpython.pdf>`_
    @ PDX Python
-   `Django without Django <http://dev.pocoo.org/~mitsuhiko/django-without-django.pdf>`_
    @ Djangocon 2009

Commit message:

Various updates, moved talks to a separate page

projects.rst, after:

public: yes

Projects
========

Over the last couple of years I worked on a number of open source
projects.  Most of them were Python, a couple of others however were also
C, PHP or other languages mixed in.  Talks I held have been moved `to a new
place on this website </talks/>`_.

Projects I've founded are marked with stars (‘*’), others are project I
joined.  Projects where I helped out for a short period of time are marked
with a dagger (‘†’).

Open Source Libraries
---------------------

-   `Pygments <http://pygments.pocoo.org/>`_ — syntax highlighter written in Python.  *2005-*
-   `Jinja <http://jinja.pocoo.org/>`_ — template engine for Python.  *2006-*
-   `Ruty <http://ruty.rubyforge.org/>`_ — a port of Django templates to Ruby.  *2007*
-   `Twig <http://www.twig-project.org/>`_ — a Django-inspired template
    engine for PHP (basic implementation, now part of Symphony)
-   `phpserialize <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/phpserialize>`_ —
    implementation of the PHP serialization for Python. *2007*
-   `Sphinx <http://sphinx.pocoo.org/>`_ — a Python documentation tool.  *2007-*
-   `Werkzeug <http://werkzeug.pocoo.org/>`_ — WSGI utility library for Python.  *2007-* *
-   `Babel <http://babel.edgewall.org/>`_ — collection of tools for
    internationalizing Python applications.  *2008-* *
-   `CleverCSS <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/CleverCSS>`_ — CSS toolkit for Python, *2009-* *
-   `GHRML <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/GHRML>`_ — HAML inspired template
    engine based on Genshi for Python.  *2009* *
-   `Flask <http://flask.pocoo.org/>`_ — a microframework for Python based
    on good intentions.  *2010-* *

*small contribtions and libraries are not listed*

Open Source Applications
------------------------

-   `Zine <http://zine.pocoo.org/>`_ — a blog software written in Python. *2007-* *
-   `MoinMoin <http://moinmo.in>`_ — wiki engine written in Python. *2008* †
-   `Plurk Solace <http://opensource.plurk.com/solace/>`_ — a multilingual support application. *2009-*

Websites
--------

-   `ubuntuusers.de <http://www.ubuntuusers.de/>`_ — many parts of the current running software. *2004-*
-   `Pocoo <http://dev.pocoo.org/>`_ — the project websites with some exceptions. *2005-*
-   `Architekten Ronacher <http://architekten-ronacher.at/>`_ — design and backend. *2009*

Projects for Competitions
-------------------------

-   `“Be a Bee” <http://www.aec.at/prix_history_en.php?year=2003>`_ — for u19, Ars Electronica 2003. 2nd Place. *2003*

Commercial Projects
-------------------

-   `Plurk <http://www.plurk.com/>`_ — a microblogging platform. *2008-2009*
