---
tags: ['thoughts']
summary: "The difference between business in Europe and the US."
---

# Regulation Isn't the European Trap — Resignation Is

Plenty has been written about how hard it is to build in Europe versus the US.
The list is always the same with little process: brittle politics, dense
bureaucracy, mandatory notaries, endless and rigid
[KYC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Know_your_customer) and
[AML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti%E2%80%93money_laundering) processes.
Fine.  I know, you know.

I'm not here to add another complaint to the pile (but if we meet over a beer
or coffee, I'm happy to unload a lot of hilarious anecdotes on you).  The
unfortunate reality is that most of these constraints won't change in my
lifetime and maybe ever.  Europe is not culturally aligned with
entrepreneurship, it's opposed to the idea of employee equity, and our laws
reflect that.

What bothers me isn't the rules — it's the posture that develops form it within
people that should know better.  Across the system, everyone points at someone
else.  If a process takes 10 steps, you'll find 10 people who feel absolved of
responsibility because they can cite 9 other blockers.  Friction becomes a
moral license to do a mediocre job (while lamenting about it).

The vibe is: "Because the system is slow, I can be slow.  Because there are
rules, I don't need judgment. Because there's risk, I don't need initiative."
And then we all nod along and nothing moves.

There are excellent people here; I've worked with them.  But they are fighting
upstream against a default of low agency.  When the process is bad, too many
people collapse into it.  Communication narrows to the shortest possible
message.  Friday after 2pm, the notary won't reply — and the notary surely will blame
labor costs or regulation for why service ends there.  The bank will cite
compliance for why they don't need to do anything.  The registrar will point at
some law that allows them to demand a translation of a document by a court
appointed translator.  Everyone has a reason.  No one owns the outcome.

Meanwhile, in the US, our counsel replies when it matters, even after hours.
Bankers answer the same day.  The instinct is to enable progress, not enumerate
reasons you can’t have it.  The goal is the outcome and the rules are
constraints to navigate, not a shield to hide behind.

So what's the point?  I can't fix politics.  What I can do: act with agency,
and surround myself with people who do the same and speak in support of it.
Work with those who start from "how do we make this work?" not "why this can't
work."  Name the absurdities without using them as cover.  Be transparent, move
anyway and tell people.

Nothing stops a notary from designing an onboarding flow that gets an Austrian
company set up in five days — standardized KYC packets, templated resolutions,
scheduled signing slots, clear checklists, async updates, a bias for same-day
feedback.  That could exist right now.  It rarely does or falls short.

Yes, much in Europe is objectively worse for builders.  We have to accept it.
Then squeeze everything you can from what is in your control:

* Own the handoff. When you're step 3 of 10, behave like step 10 depends on you
  and behave like you control all 10 steps.  Anticipate blockers further down
  the line.  Move same day.  Eliminate ambiguity.  Close loops.
* Default to clarity.  Send checklists.  Preempt the next two questions.
  Reduce the number of touches.
* Model urgency without theatrics.  Be calm, fast, and precise.  Don't
  make your customer chase you.
* Use judgment.  Rules exist and we can't break them all.  But we can work with
  them and be guided by them.

Select for agency.  Choose partners who answer promptly when it's material and
who don't confuse process with progress.

The trap is not only regulation.  It's the learned helplessness it breeds.  If
we let friction set our standards, we become the friction.  We won't legislate
our way to a US-style environment anytime soon.  But we don't need permission
to be better operators inside a bad one.

That's the contrast and it's the part we control.

----

**Postscript:** Comparing Europe to the US triggers people and I'm concious of
that.  Maturity is holding two truths at once: they do some things right and
some things wrong and so do we.  You don't win by talking others down or
praying for their failure.  I'd rather see both Europe and the US succeed than
celebrate Europe failing slightly less.

And no, saying I feel gratitude and happiness when I get a midnight reply
doesn't make me anti-work-life balance ([I am not](/2025/9/4/996/)).  It means
when something is truly time-critical, fast, clear action lifts everyone.  The
times someone sent a document in minutes, late at night, both sides felt good
about it when it mattered.  Responsiveness, used with judgment, is not
exploitation; it's respect for outcomes and the relationships we form.
