public: yes
tags: [thoughts, rust]
summary: Bringing the great successes of financial engineering to Rust.

On Tech Debt: My Rust Library is now a CDO
==========================================

You're probably familiar with tech debt.  There is a joke that if there is
tech debt, surely there must be derivatives to work with that debt?  I'm
happy to say that the Rust ecosystem has created an environment where it
looks like one solution for tech debt is collateralization.

Here is how this miracle works.  Say you have a library `stuff
<https://github.com/mitsuhiko/insta>`__ which depends on some other
library `learned-rust-this-way <https://github.com/chyh1990/yaml-rust>`__.
The author of `learned-rust-this-way` at one point lost interest in this
thing and issues keep piling up.  Some of those issues are feature
requests, others are legitimate bugs.  However you as the person that
wrote `stuff` never ran into any of those problems.  Yet it's hard to
argue that `learned-rust-this-way` isn't tech debt.  It's one that does
not bother you all that much, but it's debt nonetheless.

At one point someone else figures out that `learned-rust-this-way` is debt.
One of the ways in which this happens is because the name is great.
Clearly that's not the only person that learned Rust this way and someone
else also wants that name.  Except the original author is unreachable.  So
now there is one more reason for that package `to get added to the RUSTSEC
database <https://github.com/rustsec/advisory-db/issues/1921>`__ and all
the sudden all hell breaks lose.  Within minutes CI will start failing for
a lot of people that directly or indirectly use `learned-rust-this-way`
notifying them that something happened.  That's because `RUSTSEC` is
basically a rating agency and they decided that your debt is now junk.

What happens next?  As the maintainer of `stuff` your users all the sudden
start calling you out for using `learned-rust-this-way` and you suffer.
Stress levels increase.  You gotta unload that shit.  Why?  Not because it
does not work for you, but someone called you out of that debt.  If we
really want to stress the financial terms this is your margin call.  Your
users demand action to deal with your debt.

So what can you do?  One option is to move to alternatives (unload the
debt).  In this particular case for whatever reason all the alternatives
to `learned-rust-this-way` are not looking very appealing either.  One is
a fork of that thing which also only has a single maintained, but all the
sudden pulls in 3 more dependencies, one of which already have a "B-"
rating.  Another option in the ecosystem just decided `to default
<https://github.com/dtolnay/serde-yaml/commit/3ba8462f7d3b603d832e0daeb6cfc7168a673d7a>`__
before they are called out.

Remember you never touched `learned-rust-this-way` actively.  It worked
for you in the unmaintained way of the last four years.  If you now fork
that library (and name it `learned-rust-this-way-and-its-okay`) you are
now subject to the same demands.  Forking that library is putting cash on
the pile of debt.  Except if you don't act up on the bug reports there,
you will eventually be called out like `learned-rust-this-way` was.  So
while that might buy you time, it does not really solve the issue.

However here is what actually does work: you just merge that code into
your own library.  Now that junk tech debt is suddenly rated “AAA”.  For
as long as you never touch that code any more, you never reveal to anyone
that you did that, and you just keep maintaining your library like you did
before, the world keeps spinning on.

So as of today: I collateralized `yaml-rust` by vendoring it in `insta`.
It's now an amalgamation of insta code and yaml-rust.  And by doing so, I
successfully upgraded this junk tech debt to a perfect AAA.

Who won?  I think nobody really.
