public: yes
tags: [announcement]
summary: |
  Short update on why this site looks different and what changed under
  the hood and where the rest of the content went.

New Blog
========

I really wanted to stop giving status updates like this on my blog as
irrelevant information is much better suited for twitter, but let this be
the last exception.  I used to use my own blog software “Zine” on this
website but after a while I had to recognice that I hate traditional
weblog software.  When I started blogging a few years ago I used wordpress
like everybody else did.  I also used subversion (if at all) and generally
the world was a different place.

I always thought it would be a huge plus to be able to edit your blog
posts online from any computer.  However I no longer have the urge to
update my blog from a random location, instead I want to use this place to
share things I learned, little stories, useful experiences and other
things.  And all that requires careful proof reading and because it takes
time, there is no reason why I shouldn't be able to do that on my personal
notebook and my favourite text editor.

For random outbursts I now have Twitter, and that fulfills it's role
perfectly.

The other new thing on this website is, that it's no longer featuring user
comments.  There are a couple of reasons for that.  First of all 98% of
all comments submitted on my old blog were spam.  Secondly however I don't
really want user feedback to show up on my website.  Not because I am
afraid of user feedback, but because I think these discussions should go
to dedicated channels such as mailinglists, reddit and other websites.

Lastly that way I don't waste valuable CPU time on our already overloaded
pocoo box and can move the blog around as necessary.

In case you are interested in the script that generates this website, head
over to `it's github page <http://github.com/mitsuhiko/rstblog>`_.

But where did the existing content go?  I am currently in the process of
sorting out useful blog posts and useless stuff I posted here.  The former
will come back, nicely formatted and updated as necessary, the rest will
move to a different URL with the original site design and comments
preserved.
