public: yes
tags: [thoughts, python, unicode, rust]
summary: |
  Some comparisons about different ways to deal with Unicode in
  programming languages, especially about how UCS encodings work
  in comparison to UTF-8.

UCS vs UTF-8 as Internal String Encoding
========================================

Unicode is a fascinating mess.  It's fascinating in many ways, but one of
the most interesting one is how well it works given the complexity.  It's
easily forgotten when working with Unicode that even though the Unicode
Consortium actively develops the Unicode standard there is a colorful
history behind it.  Besides Unicode that everybody knows, there is also
the Universal Character Set as defined by ISO 10646.

Nowadays Unicode and ISO's UCS are for most practical purposes the same
thing with a slightly different name.  This however was not always the
case and in the beginning those were different undertakings.  The reason
this is still somewhat relevant information, is because in some ways
history still shines through.

I'm not going to talk about all the history of Unicode here, many people
have been doing this before.  In case you *are* curious, here are some
links that might be of interest:

*   `Unicode and ISO/IEC 10646 <http://babelstone.blogspot.co.uk/2007/06/unicode-and-isoiec-10646.html>`_
*   `Early Years of Unicode <http://www.unicode.org/history/earlyyears.html>`_
*   `Universal Character Set <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_10646#Correlation_to_Unicode>`_

However there are some basics that are important to know even today to get
an understanding of why things work in certain ways.  When Unicode and ISO
10646 were not the same thing yet, they had different ideas of how things
should work.  This can still be seen today in the encoding names.  UCS2
and UCS4 are 2 and 4 byte encodings for the Universal Character Set (UCS).
The UTF formats came later and until today they stand both for Unicode
Transformation Format as well as UCS Transformation Format.

UTFs
----

Unicode started out early as a 16bit encoding roughly equivalent to the
now deprecated UCS2 encoding.  When it became clear that Unicode needed
more than ~16bit of characters the hope for having a fixed length encoding
was not particularly high any more.

The ISO group already previously developed an encoding for their standard
to map the many characters that was ASCII compatible.  The format was
called UTF-1 but had some serious problems such as the lack of self
synchronization.  If you were presented with a potentially truncated or
destroyed steam of data you might have received garbage unless you knew
what data was there in the string before.

In 1992 UTF-8 was created (so a few years before Unicode 2.0) and nowadays
it's probably the most popular encoding for data exchange.  UTF-8 supports
an astonishing `80% of the internet
<http://w3techs.com/technologies/details/en-utf8/all/all>`_.  UTF-8 is
very pragmatic but not just that, it's also very reliable.

When the Unicode consortium gave up on UCS-2 because it was no longer
possible to support all of Unicode as a fixed length encoding with just 16
bits per unit two things had to happen: they needed to introduce a
variable length encoding with 16 bit unit sizes and they had to reduce the
total number of code points that can ever be addressed to find a way to
make UTF-16 get the same characteristics as UTF-8.  Namely it was
necessary that if the stream of data was corrupted, you would not be
presented with potentially misleading characters.  For instance if a
character did not fit into a single 16 bit unit and needed a second one,
it was necessary that everything continues working.  If the first one was
lost in transmission the second one is actually an invalid character that
can be ignored and not accidentally taken for a wrong character.

In order to achieve that they came up with the concept of surrogate pairs
to encode characters if they don't fit into ~16 bit.  Essentially UTF-16
is now defined as an encoding that is either 2 or 4 bytes long but never
more than that.  The way this works is that 65.536 characters fit
into just one unit.  If a character is outside of that range it gets split
up into two units of 16 bits each and the data is mangled in a way that
makes them uniquely distinct.  If you would look at one of the two
surrogates in the pair separately without the knowledge of the other, it
would become apparently that this is in incomplete character.  For this
trick to work the range `D800` to `DBFF` are reserved for the trail
surrogates and `DC00` to `DF00` for the lead ones.  As an end result the
total range of what can be encoded by UTF-16 is the lowest of all UTF
formats.

UTF-32 is the same as the old UCS-4 encoding and remains fixed width.  Why
can this remain fixed width?  As UTF-16 is now the format that can encode
the least amount of characters it set the limit for all formats.  It was
defined that 1,112,064 was the total number of code points that will ever
be defined by either Unicode or ISO 10646.  Since Unicode is now only
defined from `0` to `10FFFF` UTF-32 sounds a bit like a pointless encoding
now as it's 32 bit wide, but only ever about 21 bits are used which makes
this very wasteful.

While UTF-8 is defined all the way up to 31 bit it now can not practically
grow past 4 byte which means that the worst case of all formats is the
same:

+----------------------------+--------+--------+--------+
|                            | UTF-8  | UTF-16 | UTF-32 |
+============================+========+========+========+
| Highest code point         | 10FFFF | 10FFFF | 10FFFF |
+----------------------------+--------+--------+--------+
| Code unit size             | 8 bit  | 16 bit | 32 bit | 
+----------------------------+--------+--------+--------+
| Byte order dependent       | no     | yes    | yes    |
+----------------------------+--------+--------+--------+
| Fewest bytes per character | 1      | 2      | 4      |
+----------------------------+--------+--------+--------+
| Most bytes per character   | 4      | 4      | 4      |
+----------------------------+--------+--------+--------+

I have noticed that seems to surprise people because the assumption is
that the worst case of UTF-8 would be more than 4 bytes.  This would have
been been theoretically correct if UTF-16 would not exist and Unicode
would have received more than 1,112,064 characters.

Which One To Pick?
------------------

Out of all the choices UTF-8 immediately looks like the best one.  UTF-32
is clearly out when it comes to memory consumption as you will be wasting
about 40% or memory.  UTF-8 is also not byte order dependent which is an
immediate win, but it also works with C strings (so is backwards
compatible) and worst case it only wastes as much memory as all the other
formats.

Upon further introspection it however becomes clear that depending on the
language of the text stored, UTF-16 will become more space efficient.  For
instance for Japanese text UTF-16 will be more space efficient than UTF-8
as many characters are on the basic plane and with that will only require
a single UTF-16 code point whereas they are high enough up in the range
that they will require 3 bytes for UTF-8.

This however is not the case when Japanese text is mixed with ASCII
control structures.  For instance XML or HTML documents include enough
in-line control data that is in the ASCII range that UTF-8 becomes more
efficient as a format compared to UTF-16 (before compression).  For
instance the front page of the Japanese Wikipedia is 92KB in UTF-8 and
166KB in UTF-16.

For text UTF-8 has clearly won.  The only times I see a UTF-16 document
fly by is when I get something a Windows user accidentally created with
Notepad which apparently sometimes stores as UTF-16.

Internal Encodings
------------------

However the question is not so easy when working with Unicode internally
and there have been different opinions on this issue.  The most prominent
approaches for this have been UTF-8 and UTF-16.  UTF-16 is the encoding of
choice for Java, C# and Objective C (as well as the Windows API).  The
nice property of UTF-16 is that it allows you to be sloppy as the vast
majority of data you will be presented with is probably in the basic
plane.  This means that operations like ``strlen()`` will both return the
number of code units as well as the number of characters.

For a really long time there did not seem to be much of a contest to using
UTF-16 as internal encoding.  For a long time the only programming
language (besides lots of C code) that used UTF-8 as internal encoding
seemed to be Perl.  Now however Ruby, Go as well as Rust have decided on
using UTF-8.  While Ruby can work with lots of internal string encodings,
UTF-8 is the one you find most commonly.

The Value of Constant Access
----------------------------

So why was UTF-16 so popular?

UTF-16's biggest selling point was usually that it's possible to address
characters directly.  That would actually be fine, if programming
languages would provide a data type with at least 21 bit of precision to
hold a whole Unicode character though.  C# and Java unfortunately do not
support that.  That Java does not provide it makes sense to some degree
considering the age of the language and how the string is exposed.  That
C# does not support it is unfortunate however.

Rust and Go for instance have this better sorted out.  While they do use
UTF-8 as internal string encoding and expose this to the user, they
provide 32 bit data types (called rune in Go and char in rust).  In both
programming languages you can iterate in actual Unicode characters over
the whole string.  In many cases this is plenty because parsing for
instance usually only needs to look at one or two characters at the time.

In many ways the question is how valuable constant time addressing of a
single character in strings is.  I think this is something that is almost
impossible to answer because depending on if that's possible or not, the
typical algorithms look different.

What Rust and Go gain from having UTF-8 strings is that they are very
efficient when they need to juggle with bytes next to textual content.
For instance many wire protocols like HTTP are based on ASCII metadata.
While HTTP is technically latin1, it's very rare that you will actually
encounter a genuine latin1 header.  It's in fact, much more common, that
people will not be aware of the latin1 part of the specification and put
UTF-8 data in a header.

To take Rust as an example, parsing protocols is very efficient because in
many cases a parsing step becomes a simple memcpy.  The reason for this is
that so much data out there is UTF-8.  After copying of the data you just
need to do a basic check afterwards if the UTF-8 is not invalid, which can
be nicely optimized.  In contrast to that UTF-16 is a trickier because
you need to figure out the length of the buffer through an initial scan
and then a second one to decode the data.  Or you do it in one go and
overallocate.

Go even gets away with using completely unchecked UTF-8 strings.  In Rust
it's impossible to construct a string in safe code with invalid UTF-8
characters.  Go on the other hand lets you happily mix random bytes into
your string, but all IO operations are required to ensure that the data is
valid.  While this sounds pretty terrible it's actually not too bad.  I do
prefer Rust's approach though which still gives you the nice handling of
bytes and strings that Go provides, but errors stay somewhat contained as
you can expect a string to be valid.

Rethinking Internal Formats?
----------------------------

For a really long time it looked like nobody would challenge the idea of
using UTF-16 as internal string format but that seems to change now.  On
one hand some languages are exploring using UTF-8 internally, on the other
hand we have Python 3 which explores the idea of switching between latin1,
UCS-2 and UTF-32 on a string-by-string basis.

The Python 3 trick sounded quite good on the paper but I noticed that
there are some practical downsides.  For instance Emojis are outside of
the basic plane which means that Python needs to represent them as UTF-32
internally.  With how lots of template engines are currently structured
that can cause some interesting characteristics.  Jinja2 for instance
currently renders in Unicode and then has a separate encoding step.  If
you would build a github comment page and an Emoji would be in the
comments then whole your response upgrades to UTF-32 just because of a
single character.  In corner cases like this it might be interesting to
use the streaming interface of Jinja2 to encode chunk by chunk to UTF-8 to
avoid the extra cost of a more expensive internal string.

As someone who works a lot at the byte <-> Unicode boundary the idea of
having strings with an internal UTF-8 encoding is very interesting.
Having worked with Rust for a while now I am getting more and more
convinced that the approach is a good idea.  While it forces you to give
up on the idea of being able to address characters individually, that is
actually not a huge loss.  For a start Unicode would pretty much require
you to normalize your strings anyways before you do text processing due to
the many ways in which you can format the strings.  For instance umlauts
come in combined characters but they can also be manually created by
placing the regular letter followed by the combining diaeresis character.

So for quite a few operations (like validating length, font rendering
etc.) the basic operations a string type provides are already non
sufficient anyways.  Something as simple as “is this string long enough
for a tweet” already requires quite a bit of special casing.

So far at least I have not missed direct character access for anything but
peeking at known ASCII characters in Rust and I don't really expect that
the string would become a problem.  Especially if UTF-8 stays the dominant
format then keeping it internally as well makes a lot of sense and
requires lots of unnecessary encoding and decoding steps and means the
language does not need to provide support for ASCII strings separately.

I'm definitely expecting more languages to take the UTF-8 route in the
future and just provide more tools to deal with Unicode as part of the
standard library.
