2014/1/5/unicode-in-2-and-3.rst, before:

public: yes
tags: [thoughts, python]
summary: |
  Some thoughts about bytes and Unicode in Python 2 and Python 3.

More About Unicode in Python 2 and 3
====================================

It's becoming increasingly harder to have reasonable discussions about the
differences between Python 2 and 3 because one language is dead and the
other is actively developed.  So when someone starts a discussion about
the Unicode support between those two languages it's not an even playing
field.  So I won't discuss the actual Unicode support of those two
languages but the core model of how to deal with text and bytes in both.

I will use this post to show that from the pure design of the language and
standard library why Python 2 the better language for dealing with text
and bytes.

Since I have to maintain lots of code that deals exactly with the path
between Unicode and bytes this regression from 2 to 3 has caused me lots
of grief.  Especially when I see slides by core Python maintainers about
how I should `trust them that 3.3 is better than 2.7
<https://speakerdeck.com/pyconslides/python-3-dot-3-trust-me-its-better-than-python-2-dot-7-by-dr-brett-cannon>`_ makes me more than angry.

The Text Model
--------------

The main difference between Python 2 and Python 3 is the basic types that
exist to deal with texts and bytes.  On Python 3 we have one text type:
``str`` which holds Unicode data and two byte types ``bytes`` and
``bytearray``.

On the other hand on Python 2 we have two text types: ``str`` which for
all intents and purposes is limited to ASCII + some undefined data above
the 7 bit range, ``unicode`` which is equivalent to the Python 3 ``str``
type and one byte type ``bytearray`` which it inherited from Python 3.

Looking at that you can see that Python 3 removed something: support for
non Unicode data text.  For that sacrifice it gained a hashable byte type,
the ``bytes`` object.  ``bytearray`` is a mutable type, so it's not
suitable for hashing.  I very rarely use true binary data as dictionary
keys though so it does not show up as big problem.  Especially not because
in Python 2, you can just put bytes into the ``str`` type without issues.

The Lost Type
-------------

Python 3 essentially removed the byte-string type which in 2.x was called
``str``.  On the paper there is nothing inherently wrong with it.  From a
purely theoretical point of view text always in Unicode sounds awesome.
And it is.  If your whole world is just your interpreter.  Unfortunately
that's not how it works in the real world where you need to interface with
bytes and different encodings on a regular basis and for that, the Python
3 model completely breaks down.

Let me be clear upfront: Python 2's way of dealing with Unicode is error
prone and I am all in favour of improving it.  My point though is that
the one in Python 3 is a step backwards and brought so many more issues
that I absolutely hate working with it.

Unicode Errors
--------------

Before I go into the details, we need to understand what the differences
of the Unicode support in Python 2 and 3 is, and why the decision was made
to change it.

Python 2, like many languages before it, was created without support for
dealing with strings of different encodings.  A string was a string and it
contained bytes.  It was up to the developer to properly deal with
different encodings manually.  This actually works remarkably fine for
many situations.  The Django framework for many years did not support
Unicode at all and used the byte-string interface in Python exclusively.

Python 2 however also gained better and better support for Unicode
internally over the years and through this Unicode support it gained
support for different encodings to represent that Unicode data.

In Python 2 the way of dealing with strings of a specific encoding was
actually remarkably simple when it started out.  You took a string you got
from somewhere (which was a byte-string) and decoded it from the encoding
you got from a side-channel (header data, metadata etc., specification)
into an Unicode string.  Once it was an Unicode string, it supported the
same operations as a regular byte-string but it supported a much larger
character range.  When you needed to send that string elsewhere for
processing you usually encoded it back into an encoding that the other
system can deal with and it becomes a byte-string again.

So what were the issues with that?  At the core this worked, unfortunately
Python 2 needed to provide a nice migration path from the non-Unicode into
the Unicode world.  This was done by allowing coercion of byte-strings and
non byte-strings.  When does this happen and how does it work?

Essentially when you have an operation involving a byte-string and a
Unicode-string, the byte-string is promoted into a Unicode string by going
through an implicit decoding process that uses the “default encoding”
which is set to ASCII.  Python did provide a way to change this encoding
at one point, but nowadays the ``site.py`` module removes the function to
set this encoding after it sets the encoding to ``ASCII``.  If you start
Python with the ``-S`` flag the ``sys.setdefaultencoding`` function is
still there and you can experiment what happens if you set your Python
default encoding to ``UTF-8`` for instance.

So here are some situations where the default encoding kicks in:

1.  Implicit encoding upon string concatenation:

    .. sourcecode:: pycon

        >>> "Hello " + u"World"
        u'Hello World'

    Here the string on the left is decoded by using the default system
    encoding into a Unicode string.  If it would contain non-ASCII
    characters this normally blow up with an ``UnicodeDecodeError``
    because the default encoding is set to ASCII.

2.  Implicit encoding through comparison:

    .. sourcecode:: pycon

        >>> "Foo" == u"Foo"
        True
        
    This sounds more evil as it is.  Essentially it decodes the left side
    to Unicode and then compares.  In case the left side cannot be decoded
    it will warn and return False.  This is actually surprisingly sane
    behavior even though it sounds insane at first.

3.  Implicit decoding as part of a codec.

    This one is an evil one and most likely the source of all confusion
    about Unicode in Python 2.  Confusing enough that Python 3 took the
    absolutely insanely radical step and removed ``.decode()`` from
    Unicode strings and ``.encode()`` from byte strings and caused me
    major frustration.  In my mind this was an insanely stupid decision
    but I have been told more than once that my point of view is wrong and
    it won't be changed back.

    The implicit decoding as part of a codec operation looks like this:

    .. sourcecode:: pycon

        >>> "foo".encode('utf-8')
        'foo'

    Here the string is obviously a byte-string.  We ask it to encode to
    UTF-8.  This by itself makes no sense because the UTF-8 codec encodes
    from Unicode to UTF-8 bytes.  So how does this work?  It works because
    the UTF-8 codec sees that the object is not a Unicode string and first
    performs a coercion to Unicode through the default codec.  Since
    ``"foo"`` is ASCII only and the default encoding is ASCII this
    coercion will succeed and then the resulting ``u"foo"`` string will be
    encoded through UTF-8.

Codec System
------------

So you now know that Python 2 has two ways to represent strings: in bytes
and in Unicode.  The conversion between those two happens by using the
Python codec system.  However the codec system does not enforce that a
conversion always needs to take place between Unicode and bytes or the
other way round.  A codec can implement a transformation between bytes and
bytes and Unicode and Unicode.  In fact, the codec system itself can
implement a conversion between any Python type.  You could have a JSON
codec that decodes from a string into a complex Python object if you so
desire.

That this might cause issues at one point has been understood from the
very start.  There is a codec called ``'undefined'`` which can be set as
default encoding in which case any string coercion is disabled:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.setdefaultencoding('undefined')

    >>> "foo" + u"bar"
    Traceback (most recent call last):
        raise UnicodeError("undefined encoding")
    UnicodeError: undefined encoding

This is implemented as a codec that raises errors for any operation.  The
sole purpose of that module is to disable the implicit coercion.

So how did Python 3 fix this?  Python 3 removed all codecs that don't go
from bytes to Unicode or vice versa and removed the now useless
``.encode()`` method on bytes and ``.decode()`` method on strings.
Unfortunately that turned out to be a terrible decision because there are
many, many codecs that are incredibly useful.  For instance it's very
common to decode with the hex codec in Python 2:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> "\x00\x01".encode('hex')
    '0001'

While you might argue that this particular case can also be handled by a
module like ``binascii``, there is a deeper problem with that which is
that the codec module is also separately available.  For instance
libraries implementing reading from sockets used the codec system to
perform partial decoding of zlib streams:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> import codecs
    >>> decoder = codecs.getincrementaldecoder('zlib')('strict')
    >>> decoder.decode('x\x9c\xf3H\xcd\xc9\xc9Wp')
    'Hello '
    >>> decoder.decode('\xcdK\xceO\xc9\xccK/\x06\x00+\xad\x05\xaf')
    'Encodings'

This was eventually recognized and Python 3.3 restored those codecs.  Now
however we're in the land of user confusion again because these codecs
don't provide the meta information before the call about what types they
can deal with.  Because of this you can now trigger errors like this on
Python 3:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> "Hello World".encode('zlib_codec')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: 'str' does not support the buffer interface

(Note that the codec is now called ``zlib_codec`` instead of ``zlib``
because Python 3.3 does not have the old aliases set up.)

So given the current state of Python 3.3, what exactly would happen if we
would get the ``.encode()`` method on byte strings back for instance?
This is easy to test, even without having to hack the Python interpreter.
Let's just settle for a function with the same behavior for the moment:

.. sourcecode:: python

    import codecs

    def encode(s, name, *args, **kwargs):
        codec = codecs.lookup(name)
        rv, length = codec.encode(s, *args, **kwargs)
        if not isinstance(rv, (str, bytes, bytearray)):
            raise TypeError('Not a string or byte codec')
        return rv

Now we can use this as replacement for the ``.encode()`` method we had on
byte strings:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> b'Hello World'.encode('latin1')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    AttributeError: 'bytes' object has no attribute 'encode'

    >>> encode(b'Hello World', 'latin1')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 4, in encode
    TypeError: Can't convert 'bytes' object to str implicitly

Oha!  Python 3 can already deal with this.  And we get a nice error.  I
would even argue that “Can't convert 'bytes' object to str implicitly” is
a lot nicer than “'bytes' object has no attribute 'encode'”.

Why do we still not have those encoding methods back?  I really don't know
and I no longer care either.  I have been told multiple times now that my
point of view is wrong and I don't understand beginners, or that the “text
model” has been changed and my request makes no sense.

Byte-Strings are Gone
---------------------

Aside from the codec system regression there is also the case that all
text operations now are only defined for Unicode strings.  In a way this
seems to make sense, but it does not really.  Previously the interpreter
had implementations for operations on byte strings and Unicode strings.
This was pretty obvious to the programmer as custom objects had to
implement both ``__str__`` and ``__unicode__`` if they wanted to be
formatted into either.  Again, there was implicit coercion going on which
confused newcomers, but at least we had the option for both.

Why was this useful?  Because for instance if you write low-level
protocols you often need to deal with formatting numbers out into byte
strings.

Python's own version control system is still not on Python 3 because for
years now because the Python team does not `bring back string
formatting for bytes <http://bugs.python.org/issue3982>`_.

This is getting ridiculous now though, because it turned out that the
model chosen for Python 3 just does not work in reality.  For instance in
Python 3 the developers just “upgraded” some APIs to Unicode only, making
them completely useless for real-world situations.  For instance you could
no longer parse byte only URLs with the standard library, the implicit
assumption was that every URL as Unicode (for that matter, you could not
handle non-Unicode mails any more either, completely ignoring that binary
attachments exist).

This was fixed obviously, but because byte strings are gone now, the URL
parsing library ships two implementations now.  One for Unicode strings
and one for byte objects.  Two implementations behind the same function
though, just the return value is vastly different now:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> from urllib.parse import urlparse
    >>> urlparse('http://www.google.com/')
    ParseResult(scheme='http', netloc='www.google.com',
                path='/', params='', query='', fragment='')
    >>> urlparse(b'http://www.google.com/')
    ParseResultBytes(scheme=b'http', netloc=b'www.google.com',
                     path=b'/', params=b'', query=b'', fragment=b'')

Looks similar?  Not at all, because they are made of different types.  One
is a tuple of strings, the other is more like a tuple of arrays of
integers.  I have `written about this before
<../../../../2013/7/2/the-updated-guide-to-unicode/>`_ already and it
still pains me.  It makes writing code for Python incredibly frustrating
now or hugely inefficient because you need to go through multiple encode
and decode steps.  Aside from that, it's really hard to write fully
functional code now.  The idea that everything can be Unicode is nice in
theory, but totally not applicable for the real world.

Python 3 is riddled with weird workarounds now for situations where you
cannot use Unicode strings and for someone like me, who has to deal with
those situations a lot, it's ridiculously annoying.

Our Workarounds Break
---------------------

The Unicode support in 2.x was not perfect, far from it.  There was
missing APIs and problems left and right, but we as programmers made it
work.  Unfortunately many of the ways in which we made it work, do not
transfer well to Python 3 any more and some of the APIs would have had to
have been changed to work well on Python 3.

My favourite example now is the file streams which like before are either
text or bytes, but there is no way to reliably figure out which one is
which.  The trick which I helped to popularize is to read zero bytes from
the stream to figure out of which type it is.  Unfortunately those
workarounds `don't work reliably either
<http://bugs.python.org/issue20007>`_.  For instance passing a urllib
request object to Flask's JSON parse function breaks on Python 3 but works
on Python 2 as a result of this:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> from urllib.request import urlopen
    >>> r = urlopen('https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Flask/json')
    >>> from flask import json
    >>> json.load(r)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "decoder.py", line 368, in raw_decode
    StopIteration

    During handling of the above exception, another exception occurred:

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    ValueError: No JSON object could be decoded

The Outlook
-----------

There are many more problems with Python 3's Unicode support than just
those.  I started unfollowing Python developers on Twitter because I got
so fed up with having to read about how amazing Python 3 is which is in
such conflict with my own experiences.  Yes, lots of things are cool in
Python 3, but the core flow of dealing with Unicode and bytes is not.

(The worst of all of this is that many of the features in Python 3 which
are genuinely cool could just as well work on Python 2 as well.  Things
like ``yield from``, ``nonlocal``, SNI SSL support etc.)

In light of `only about 3% of all Python developers using Python 3
properly <http://alexgaynor.net/2014/jan/03/pypi-download-statistics/>`_
and developers proudly declaring on Twitter that “the migration is going
as planned” I got so incredibly frustrated that I nearly published an
multi page rant about my experience with Python 3 and how we should kill
it.

I won't do that now but I do wish Python 3 core developers would become a
bit more humble.  For 97% of us, Python 2 is our beloved world for years
to come and telling us constantly about how amazing Python 3 is not just
painful, it's also wrong in light of the many regressions.  With people
starting to discuss Python 2.8, a Stackless Python 2.8 coming up and these
bad usage numbers, I don't know what failure is, if not that.

Commit message:

Changed wording of Stackless release due to request.

2014/1/5/unicode-in-2-and-3.rst, after:

public: yes
tags: [thoughts, python]
summary: |
  Some thoughts about bytes and Unicode in Python 2 and Python 3.

More About Unicode in Python 2 and 3
====================================

It's becoming increasingly harder to have reasonable discussions about the
differences between Python 2 and 3 because one language is dead and the
other is actively developed.  So when someone starts a discussion about
the Unicode support between those two languages it's not an even playing
field.  So I won't discuss the actual Unicode support of those two
languages but the core model of how to deal with text and bytes in both.

I will use this post to show that from the pure design of the language and
standard library why Python 2 the better language for dealing with text
and bytes.

Since I have to maintain lots of code that deals exactly with the path
between Unicode and bytes this regression from 2 to 3 has caused me lots
of grief.  Especially when I see slides by core Python maintainers about
how I should `trust them that 3.3 is better than 2.7
<https://speakerdeck.com/pyconslides/python-3-dot-3-trust-me-its-better-than-python-2-dot-7-by-dr-brett-cannon>`_ makes me more than angry.

The Text Model
--------------

The main difference between Python 2 and Python 3 is the basic types that
exist to deal with texts and bytes.  On Python 3 we have one text type:
``str`` which holds Unicode data and two byte types ``bytes`` and
``bytearray``.

On the other hand on Python 2 we have two text types: ``str`` which for
all intents and purposes is limited to ASCII + some undefined data above
the 7 bit range, ``unicode`` which is equivalent to the Python 3 ``str``
type and one byte type ``bytearray`` which it inherited from Python 3.

Looking at that you can see that Python 3 removed something: support for
non Unicode data text.  For that sacrifice it gained a hashable byte type,
the ``bytes`` object.  ``bytearray`` is a mutable type, so it's not
suitable for hashing.  I very rarely use true binary data as dictionary
keys though so it does not show up as big problem.  Especially not because
in Python 2, you can just put bytes into the ``str`` type without issues.

The Lost Type
-------------

Python 3 essentially removed the byte-string type which in 2.x was called
``str``.  On the paper there is nothing inherently wrong with it.  From a
purely theoretical point of view text always in Unicode sounds awesome.
And it is.  If your whole world is just your interpreter.  Unfortunately
that's not how it works in the real world where you need to interface with
bytes and different encodings on a regular basis and for that, the Python
3 model completely breaks down.

Let me be clear upfront: Python 2's way of dealing with Unicode is error
prone and I am all in favour of improving it.  My point though is that
the one in Python 3 is a step backwards and brought so many more issues
that I absolutely hate working with it.

Unicode Errors
--------------

Before I go into the details, we need to understand what the differences
of the Unicode support in Python 2 and 3 is, and why the decision was made
to change it.

Python 2, like many languages before it, was created without support for
dealing with strings of different encodings.  A string was a string and it
contained bytes.  It was up to the developer to properly deal with
different encodings manually.  This actually works remarkably fine for
many situations.  The Django framework for many years did not support
Unicode at all and used the byte-string interface in Python exclusively.

Python 2 however also gained better and better support for Unicode
internally over the years and through this Unicode support it gained
support for different encodings to represent that Unicode data.

In Python 2 the way of dealing with strings of a specific encoding was
actually remarkably simple when it started out.  You took a string you got
from somewhere (which was a byte-string) and decoded it from the encoding
you got from a side-channel (header data, metadata etc., specification)
into an Unicode string.  Once it was an Unicode string, it supported the
same operations as a regular byte-string but it supported a much larger
character range.  When you needed to send that string elsewhere for
processing you usually encoded it back into an encoding that the other
system can deal with and it becomes a byte-string again.

So what were the issues with that?  At the core this worked, unfortunately
Python 2 needed to provide a nice migration path from the non-Unicode into
the Unicode world.  This was done by allowing coercion of byte-strings and
non byte-strings.  When does this happen and how does it work?

Essentially when you have an operation involving a byte-string and a
Unicode-string, the byte-string is promoted into a Unicode string by going
through an implicit decoding process that uses the “default encoding”
which is set to ASCII.  Python did provide a way to change this encoding
at one point, but nowadays the ``site.py`` module removes the function to
set this encoding after it sets the encoding to ``ASCII``.  If you start
Python with the ``-S`` flag the ``sys.setdefaultencoding`` function is
still there and you can experiment what happens if you set your Python
default encoding to ``UTF-8`` for instance.

So here are some situations where the default encoding kicks in:

1.  Implicit encoding upon string concatenation:

    .. sourcecode:: pycon

        >>> "Hello " + u"World"
        u'Hello World'

    Here the string on the left is decoded by using the default system
    encoding into a Unicode string.  If it would contain non-ASCII
    characters this normally blow up with an ``UnicodeDecodeError``
    because the default encoding is set to ASCII.

2.  Implicit encoding through comparison:

    .. sourcecode:: pycon

        >>> "Foo" == u"Foo"
        True
        
    This sounds more evil as it is.  Essentially it decodes the left side
    to Unicode and then compares.  In case the left side cannot be decoded
    it will warn and return False.  This is actually surprisingly sane
    behavior even though it sounds insane at first.

3.  Implicit decoding as part of a codec.

    This one is an evil one and most likely the source of all confusion
    about Unicode in Python 2.  Confusing enough that Python 3 took the
    absolutely insanely radical step and removed ``.decode()`` from
    Unicode strings and ``.encode()`` from byte strings and caused me
    major frustration.  In my mind this was an insanely stupid decision
    but I have been told more than once that my point of view is wrong and
    it won't be changed back.

    The implicit decoding as part of a codec operation looks like this:

    .. sourcecode:: pycon

        >>> "foo".encode('utf-8')
        'foo'

    Here the string is obviously a byte-string.  We ask it to encode to
    UTF-8.  This by itself makes no sense because the UTF-8 codec encodes
    from Unicode to UTF-8 bytes.  So how does this work?  It works because
    the UTF-8 codec sees that the object is not a Unicode string and first
    performs a coercion to Unicode through the default codec.  Since
    ``"foo"`` is ASCII only and the default encoding is ASCII this
    coercion will succeed and then the resulting ``u"foo"`` string will be
    encoded through UTF-8.

Codec System
------------

So you now know that Python 2 has two ways to represent strings: in bytes
and in Unicode.  The conversion between those two happens by using the
Python codec system.  However the codec system does not enforce that a
conversion always needs to take place between Unicode and bytes or the
other way round.  A codec can implement a transformation between bytes and
bytes and Unicode and Unicode.  In fact, the codec system itself can
implement a conversion between any Python type.  You could have a JSON
codec that decodes from a string into a complex Python object if you so
desire.

That this might cause issues at one point has been understood from the
very start.  There is a codec called ``'undefined'`` which can be set as
default encoding in which case any string coercion is disabled:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.setdefaultencoding('undefined')

    >>> "foo" + u"bar"
    Traceback (most recent call last):
        raise UnicodeError("undefined encoding")
    UnicodeError: undefined encoding

This is implemented as a codec that raises errors for any operation.  The
sole purpose of that module is to disable the implicit coercion.

So how did Python 3 fix this?  Python 3 removed all codecs that don't go
from bytes to Unicode or vice versa and removed the now useless
``.encode()`` method on bytes and ``.decode()`` method on strings.
Unfortunately that turned out to be a terrible decision because there are
many, many codecs that are incredibly useful.  For instance it's very
common to decode with the hex codec in Python 2:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> "\x00\x01".encode('hex')
    '0001'

While you might argue that this particular case can also be handled by a
module like ``binascii``, there is a deeper problem with that which is
that the codec module is also separately available.  For instance
libraries implementing reading from sockets used the codec system to
perform partial decoding of zlib streams:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> import codecs
    >>> decoder = codecs.getincrementaldecoder('zlib')('strict')
    >>> decoder.decode('x\x9c\xf3H\xcd\xc9\xc9Wp')
    'Hello '
    >>> decoder.decode('\xcdK\xceO\xc9\xccK/\x06\x00+\xad\x05\xaf')
    'Encodings'

This was eventually recognized and Python 3.3 restored those codecs.  Now
however we're in the land of user confusion again because these codecs
don't provide the meta information before the call about what types they
can deal with.  Because of this you can now trigger errors like this on
Python 3:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> "Hello World".encode('zlib_codec')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: 'str' does not support the buffer interface

(Note that the codec is now called ``zlib_codec`` instead of ``zlib``
because Python 3.3 does not have the old aliases set up.)

So given the current state of Python 3.3, what exactly would happen if we
would get the ``.encode()`` method on byte strings back for instance?
This is easy to test, even without having to hack the Python interpreter.
Let's just settle for a function with the same behavior for the moment:

.. sourcecode:: python

    import codecs

    def encode(s, name, *args, **kwargs):
        codec = codecs.lookup(name)
        rv, length = codec.encode(s, *args, **kwargs)
        if not isinstance(rv, (str, bytes, bytearray)):
            raise TypeError('Not a string or byte codec')
        return rv

Now we can use this as replacement for the ``.encode()`` method we had on
byte strings:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> b'Hello World'.encode('latin1')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    AttributeError: 'bytes' object has no attribute 'encode'

    >>> encode(b'Hello World', 'latin1')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 4, in encode
    TypeError: Can't convert 'bytes' object to str implicitly

Oha!  Python 3 can already deal with this.  And we get a nice error.  I
would even argue that “Can't convert 'bytes' object to str implicitly” is
a lot nicer than “'bytes' object has no attribute 'encode'”.

Why do we still not have those encoding methods back?  I really don't know
and I no longer care either.  I have been told multiple times now that my
point of view is wrong and I don't understand beginners, or that the “text
model” has been changed and my request makes no sense.

Byte-Strings are Gone
---------------------

Aside from the codec system regression there is also the case that all
text operations now are only defined for Unicode strings.  In a way this
seems to make sense, but it does not really.  Previously the interpreter
had implementations for operations on byte strings and Unicode strings.
This was pretty obvious to the programmer as custom objects had to
implement both ``__str__`` and ``__unicode__`` if they wanted to be
formatted into either.  Again, there was implicit coercion going on which
confused newcomers, but at least we had the option for both.

Why was this useful?  Because for instance if you write low-level
protocols you often need to deal with formatting numbers out into byte
strings.

Python's own version control system is still not on Python 3 because for
years now because the Python team does not `bring back string
formatting for bytes <http://bugs.python.org/issue3982>`_.

This is getting ridiculous now though, because it turned out that the
model chosen for Python 3 just does not work in reality.  For instance in
Python 3 the developers just “upgraded” some APIs to Unicode only, making
them completely useless for real-world situations.  For instance you could
no longer parse byte only URLs with the standard library, the implicit
assumption was that every URL as Unicode (for that matter, you could not
handle non-Unicode mails any more either, completely ignoring that binary
attachments exist).

This was fixed obviously, but because byte strings are gone now, the URL
parsing library ships two implementations now.  One for Unicode strings
and one for byte objects.  Two implementations behind the same function
though, just the return value is vastly different now:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> from urllib.parse import urlparse
    >>> urlparse('http://www.google.com/')
    ParseResult(scheme='http', netloc='www.google.com',
                path='/', params='', query='', fragment='')
    >>> urlparse(b'http://www.google.com/')
    ParseResultBytes(scheme=b'http', netloc=b'www.google.com',
                     path=b'/', params=b'', query=b'', fragment=b'')

Looks similar?  Not at all, because they are made of different types.  One
is a tuple of strings, the other is more like a tuple of arrays of
integers.  I have `written about this before
<../../../../2013/7/2/the-updated-guide-to-unicode/>`_ already and it
still pains me.  It makes writing code for Python incredibly frustrating
now or hugely inefficient because you need to go through multiple encode
and decode steps.  Aside from that, it's really hard to write fully
functional code now.  The idea that everything can be Unicode is nice in
theory, but totally not applicable for the real world.

Python 3 is riddled with weird workarounds now for situations where you
cannot use Unicode strings and for someone like me, who has to deal with
those situations a lot, it's ridiculously annoying.

Our Workarounds Break
---------------------

The Unicode support in 2.x was not perfect, far from it.  There was
missing APIs and problems left and right, but we as programmers made it
work.  Unfortunately many of the ways in which we made it work, do not
transfer well to Python 3 any more and some of the APIs would have had to
have been changed to work well on Python 3.

My favourite example now is the file streams which like before are either
text or bytes, but there is no way to reliably figure out which one is
which.  The trick which I helped to popularize is to read zero bytes from
the stream to figure out of which type it is.  Unfortunately those
workarounds `don't work reliably either
<http://bugs.python.org/issue20007>`_.  For instance passing a urllib
request object to Flask's JSON parse function breaks on Python 3 but works
on Python 2 as a result of this:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

    >>> from urllib.request import urlopen
    >>> r = urlopen('https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Flask/json')
    >>> from flask import json
    >>> json.load(r)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "decoder.py", line 368, in raw_decode
    StopIteration

    During handling of the above exception, another exception occurred:

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    ValueError: No JSON object could be decoded

The Outlook
-----------

There are many more problems with Python 3's Unicode support than just
those.  I started unfollowing Python developers on Twitter because I got
so fed up with having to read about how amazing Python 3 is which is in
such conflict with my own experiences.  Yes, lots of things are cool in
Python 3, but the core flow of dealing with Unicode and bytes is not.

(The worst of all of this is that many of the features in Python 3 which
are genuinely cool could just as well work on Python 2 as well.  Things
like ``yield from``, ``nonlocal``, SNI SSL support etc.)

In light of `only about 3% of all Python developers using Python 3
properly <http://alexgaynor.net/2014/jan/03/pypi-download-statistics/>`_
and developers proudly declaring on Twitter that “the migration is going
as planned” I got so incredibly frustrated that I nearly published an
multi page rant about my experience with Python 3 and how we should kill
it.

I won't do that now but I do wish Python 3 core developers would become a
bit more humble.  For 97% of us, Python 2 is our beloved world for years
to come and telling us constantly about how amazing Python 3 is not just
painful, it's also wrong in light of the many regressions.  With people
starting to discuss Python 2.8, Stackless Python preparing a new release
with new features and these bad usage numbers, I don't know what failure
is, if not that.
