tags: [thoughts]
summary: Some very personal thoughts about the future of Austria.

Austria: A Fearful Country In Need Of A Vision
==============================================

This will be a slightly different post.  It has to do with the country I
am living in with my family: Austria.  More importantly it has to do with
some some observations and of mine about how this country functions.

There is a rather famous quote about Vienna: “If the world once ends, I'll
move to Vienna, because that's where everything happens fifty years
later”.  It has been attributed to Gustav Mahler who lived at the tail end
of the 19th century.  It might also have been said by anyone else or
about a different city.  Yet as a description of Vienna is highly
accurate — even today — and it in many ways describes the culture here.
While Austrians might argue that Vienna really does not represent the
country, the fundamentals of that mentality are inherent to Austria's
culture.  Austria is a very conservative country that chooses to disregard
progress for as long as it can get away with.  It's not always stuck in
the past.  There are definitely exceptions to the rule but in many ways
this conservatism is the backdrop to every day decision making.  The way I
like to portray what is happening here is that there is a strong desire
for “stability” and fear of the unknown.  Austrians prefer to miss out on
a fad over adopting something too early.

While a country is defined by its borders, the culture is defined by it's
population.  So we need to define what an “Austrian” is.  That turns out to be
rather complex and this complexity matters a lot.  Austria is a country of
9.1 Million people.  Let's take a news article from a few days ago: “4,9
Million Austrians travelled for vacation in 2023” according to Statistics
Austria.  When you read a statistic like that, you can extrapolate that
this refers to residents in Austria.  Austria has almost 20% foreigners;
in Vienna that number is 35%.  Those foreigners are divided into EU
citizens, refugees (and those applying and waiting to be processed) and
other third country nationals.  They have vastly different permissions and
rights.  It's comparatively easy to get a visa or work permit on paper
(called “Aufenthaltstitel”) but it can involves a lot of bureaucracy to
actually get one.  Even as a dependent of a EU citizen it can take months
to get your permit processed, particularly in Vienna despite the fact that
EU law requires this to take effect immediately.  The MA35 authority in
Vienna responsible for permits is well known for lack of service quality.

Citizenship on the other hand is shockingly restrictive even ignoring
bureaucracy.  You need to earn well above the national mean to be entitled
to it, the minimum waiting time is 10 years (can be shortened to 6 years
in many cases) and you need to have certificates that demonstrate that you
can speak German on B1 level or higher.  Simplifications for children are
almost non existing.  You also cannot be abroad for more than 20% of the
time which sometimes is an issue for business travellers.  It also
requires you to renounce other citizenships when you want to become
Austrian.  This leads to the other definition of “Austrian”: someone with
Austrian citizenship.  Austria has some of the lowest naturalization rates
in the EU.  Except it also has a citizenship through the backdoor.  If you
are a descendent of a holocaust victim, you are entitled citizenship
through a special process which does not require renouncing nor does it
require residence.  Unsurprisingly this has lead to the number of people
applying for citizenship this way being around half of the granted
citizenships since this law has been introduced.

Austria is a country that needs permits for everything and in some cases
these permits are bizarre.  Case in point: to operate a monetized YouTube
channel you need to register with KommAustria.  To register with
KommAustria you need to be an Austrian, EU citizen or registered refugee.
As a third country national (Russian, US citizen, Canadian etc.) there is
only a way to operate an illegal YouTube channel and just assume nobody
will mind (as many do).  There are a lot of these weird rules, and many
have to do with residence status.  Austria accepts a lot of refugees every
single year.  While they are waiting for their status to be processed,
they cannot be employed but are given money by the government.  Due to how
the law is structured, even if you want to sponsor such an applicant for a
visa, you cannot.  There is literally no process.  Because the refugee
system takes years and years at times, it means there are people who go to
school, learn the language and have no legal status.  Ultimately Austria
ends up deporting a lot of asylum seekers who did not get their status
granted.  Yet many of them companies would be happy to have as employees.

It's not just YouTube channels that need permits.  Did I mention that
there are permits everywhere?  If you want to sell SaaS software, you need
to apply for a permit and that's a rather simple one anyone can get.  But
don't you dare to try to become a tailor or confectioner.  For the
privilege of operating your own tailor business or pâtisserie you need to
be a master in tailoring or confectioneries.  I'm not a tailor, so no clue
how long that takes, but the regular path to becoming a master is a three
year apprenticeship that ends in an exam.  So if you are an Ukrainian
refugee who can tailor, even if you have the right to work, good luck
becoming a tailor.  You can already guess where all of this is going: it's
the breeding ground of small scale corruption and problematic work
situations.  It's not too infrequent that you see people being registered
as a business manager for the purposes of providing permits that itself is
not really working for that business.  Once you have a business, the rules
in which you can operate it are also limited.  Mandatory time keeping for
employees, maximum opening times for stores, all kinds of limits for what
endeavours are possible with the business license.  Even if you are
entirely alone in your store, you cannot open it whenever you want.  Even
if the store is exclusively operated by robots, it would not be allowed to
open on a Sunday and not for more than 72 hours a week.  Some things are
completely unavailable to foreigners unless they are EU citizens or
refugees.  Can't be a policemen, can't operate a restaurant (you need a
middleman), can't have a chimney sweep business (someone please explain
this one to me).

What else do you need permits for?  Well one of new things that has been
thrown in recently has been the packaging directive of the European Union.
A sender of a package has to “license” the packaging to send it to an end
user.  The license fee then goes to local waste management.  So far, so
good.  Unfortunately in the case of Austria you need to go to a notary to
register your “Representatives for packaging and single-use plastic
products”.  You can take an educated guess how many foreign companies want
to jump through these hoops.  Some sellers refuse to sell to Austria (it's
a small country after all), others pay for excessive fees from third
parties that can provide such services.  Established local sellers are
happy and supportive, after all less competition from other countries.

Taxation is very much the same story.  High income taxes, income dependent
social security contributions, value added tax etc.  All these things
drive up the cost of doing business and encourages a healthy shadow economy.

Alongside all of this sits a political system in which politicians see
themselves as kings that give out gifts to the population.  Rather than
lowering taxes, they rather give out all kinds of subsidies.

You might be able to see a pattern here.  This conservatism is in a way
really just protectionism.  Which is a valid way of live, but all of this
really prevents innovation, and it also as a lot of unintended side
effects.  Quality of life in Austria might be great, but I am pretty sure
that the country as a whole greatly eats into it's existing capital to
retain that.  While Austria might want to pretend like the world is not
changing, the reality is that it has no control of what happens elsewhere.
There are lots of countries in need of entrepreneurs, that are more
welcoming to people.  It's also aging and businesses know that immigration
is absolutely vital to the functioning of the country.

All in all it really feels like Austria is a country containing a
population that is afraid.  Afraid of new things, afraid of the unknown.
As the collective organism that it represents it's deeply suspicious.
This is not just politics, it's the natural culture.  Even foreigners who
move to the country over time assimilate to this line of thinking.  Those
who made it through the layers and layers of bureaucracy will start to
defend it.  After all, once you invested that time and money it also helps
you against competition.

Austria today takes part in a much more connected world.  It's embedded in
a free trade union, it's depending on international products and
immigration.  I find it ironic that Austria has a ton of human capital,
it's still a very attractive destination for immigrants, yet it throws
away so much potential.  It got dealt an amazing hand but it's just to
afraid of playing it.

Clearly Austria will not become a libertarian wonderland and it should not
be.  There is no appetite for large scale deregulation and that is
absolutely okay.  But there is a version of this country that stays true
to its actual values and can achieve better outcomes.  Maybe one day we
will see a political landscape that is just a bit more courageous.
