blog/about.md, before:

# About Me

<div style="float: right; margin-left: 20px; margin-bottom: 20px;">
    <img src="/static/avatar-large.jpg" alt="Picture of me" width="150" height="150" />
</div>

Hi, my name is Armin Ronacher!  I'm deeply passionate about building
teams, creating products, and contributing to the Open Source community.
As a dedicated software developer, I've had the privilege of creating a
number of very popular Open Source projects, including Flask, Jinja2, and
many [other widely used things](/projects/).

I founded [Earendil](https://earendil.com/).  For a decade, I've [been working
on Sentry](/2025/3/31/leaving/), building out one of our regional offices,
working on event ingestion, SDKs and leading the teams for our internal
developer platform.  I also love sharing knowledge and experiences, which is
why I give [talks at conferences and events](/talks/) and write about
engineering and life on this blog.

If my work has been valuable to you, I'd greatly appreciate your support
through GitHub sponsors.

<iframe src="https://github.com/sponsors/mitsuhiko/button" title="Sponsor mitsuhiko" height="35" width="116" style="border: 0; border-radius: 6px" allowtransparency="true"></iframe>

If you want to contact me, you can reach me via one of the following
communication channels:

-   via [email](mailto:armin.ronacher@active-4.com)
-   find me on [GitHub](https://github.com/mitsuhiko)
-   reach out to me on [X](https://x.com/mitsuhiko) or [Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/mitsuhiko.at).
-   watch my stuff on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@ArminRonacher)

My usual nickname is `mitsuhiko`.

## Like my Work?

All of the open source stuff I work on is liberally licensed which means
you can do with it whatever you want.

I'm currently not available for consulting or contract work, but you can
support my work via GitHub sponsors.

## About this Website

The name of this website came when a friend of mine and me were joking
about what makes a great web 2.0 website.  We came up with three things: it
has to have round corners, fresh colors and a weirdly shortened name.  So
the first version of this blog was green, named after a fresh fruit
(lucuma) and with a destroyed, abbreviated name.  Not much is left from
these days, but the name stuck.

The website itself is written in restructured text and built with a small
script.  Sourcecode can be [found on github](http://github.com/mitsuhiko/lucumr).

## Imprint

Imprint and contact information:

Armin Ronacher  
Handelskai 132a/1/46; 1020 Vienna; Austria  
VAT number / UID: AT U68598289  
Contact e-mail: armin.ronacher@active-4.com

Commit message:

Link to the other blog

blog/about.md, after:

# About Me

<div style="float: right; margin-left: 20px; margin-bottom: 20px;">
    <img src="/static/avatar-large.jpg" alt="Picture of me" width="150" height="150" />
</div>

Hi, my name is Armin Ronacher!  I'm deeply passionate about building
teams, creating products, and contributing to the Open Source community.
As a dedicated software developer, I've had the privilege of creating a
number of very popular Open Source projects, including Flask, Jinja2, and
many [other widely used things](/projects/).

I founded [Earendil](https://earendil.com/).  For a decade, I've [been working
on Sentry](/2025/3/31/leaving/), building out one of our regional offices,
working on event ingestion, SDKs and leading the teams for our internal
developer platform.  I also love sharing knowledge and experiences, which is
why I give [talks at conferences and events](/talks/) and write about
engineering and life on this blog.

If my work has been valuable to you, I'd greatly appreciate your support
through GitHub sponsors.

<iframe src="https://github.com/sponsors/mitsuhiko/button" title="Sponsor mitsuhiko" height="35" width="116" style="border: 0; border-radius: 6px" allowtransparency="true"></iframe>

If you want to contact me, you can reach me via one of the following
communication channels:

-   via [email](mailto:armin.ronacher@active-4.com)
-   find me on [GitHub](https://github.com/mitsuhiko)
-   reach out to me on [X](https://x.com/mitsuhiko) or [Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/mitsuhiko.at).

There are some other things that you might be interested in:

-   watch my stuff on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@ArminRonacher)
-   read my [darker thoughts on my other page](https://dark.ronacher.eu/)

My usual nickname is `mitsuhiko`.

## Like my Work?

All of the open source stuff I work on is liberally licensed which means
you can do with it whatever you want.

I'm currently not available for consulting or contract work, but you can
support my work via GitHub sponsors.

## About this Website

The name of this website came when a friend of mine and me were joking
about what makes a great web 2.0 website.  We came up with three things: it
has to have round corners, fresh colors and a weirdly shortened name.  So
the first version of this blog was green, named after a fresh fruit
(lucuma) and with a destroyed, abbreviated name.  Not much is left from
these days, but the name stuck.

The website itself is written in restructured text and built with a small
script.  Sourcecode can be [found on github](http://github.com/mitsuhiko/lucumr).

## Imprint

Imprint and contact information:

Armin Ronacher  
Handelskai 132a/1/46; 1020 Vienna; Austria  
VAT number / UID: AT U68598289  
Contact e-mail: armin.ronacher@active-4.com
