public: yes
tags: [thoughts, lessons]
summary: Things I learned and believe, condensed into some sort of guide.

Reflecting on Life
==================

*Last year I decided that I want to share my most important learnings
about engineering, teams and quite frankly personal mental health. My hope
is that those who want to learn from me find it useful. This is a
continuation to this.*

Over the years, I've been asked countless times: “What advice would you
give to young programmers or engineers?”  For the longest time, I
struggled to answer.  I wasn't sure I had anything definitive or profound
to offer.  And truthfully, even now, I'm not convinced I have enough
answers.  But as I've reflected on my journey to here, I've formulated
some ideas that I believe are worth sharing — if only to provide a bit of
guidance to those just starting out.  For better or worse, I think those
things are applicable regardless of profession.

My core belief is that fulfillment and happiness comes from deliberate
commitment to meaningful work, relationships, and personal growth and
purpose.  I don't claim that these things can be replicated, but they
worked for me and some others, so maybe they can be of use for you.

Put Time In
-----------

Putting time into work and skills — and by that truly investing oneself —
is always worth it.

Whether it's working on a project, solving a difficult problem, or even
refining soft skills like communication, the act of showing up and putting
in the hours is essential.  Practice makes perfect, but more so it's all
about progress rather than perfection.  Each hour you spend iterating,
refining, failing and retrying brings you closer to excellence.  It
doesn't always feel that way in the moment but when you look back at what
you did before, you will see your progress.  And that act of looking back,
and seeing how you improved, is immensely rewarding and in turn makes you
enjoy your work.

I did not start out enjoying programming, not at all.  I had a friend in
school who was just better than me at everything.  It felt demotivating.
Programming turned out to be a necessary tool that I had to build things
and to share with others, and through that, I eventually ended up enjoying
it.

There is a narrative that working hard is inherently bad for your health
or that long hours lead to burnout.  I disagree.  It's not about how many
hours you put in, but about the enjoyment and quality of the work you're
doing.  Still some of my most favorite memories were some all-nighters I
did when I was younger working on something.  It wasn't even necessarily
on projects that ended up meaningful or successful, but it was the act in
itself.  When you find joy in what you're building in the moment, work
does not feel like a burden.  Instead it feels exciting and exhilarating.
These memories, that some might describe as unhealthy are some of my most
pleasant ones.

Work And The Man
----------------

The key isn't avoiding hard work but finding meaning in it.  Practice and
effort, when coupled with a sense of purpose, not only make you better at
what you do but also make the journey itself fulfilling.  There is one
catch however, and that is that your payout should not just be your
happiness in the moment, but it should be long lasting.

The best way to completely destroy your long term satisfaction is if the
effort you are putting into something is not reciprocated or the nature
of the work feels meaningless.  It's an obvious privilege to recommend
that one shall not work for exploitative employers but you owe yourself to
get this right.  With time you build trust in yourself, and the best way
to put this trust to use, is to break out of exploitative relationships.

If you end up doing things you do not believe in, it will get to you.  It
will not just demotivate you and make you unhappy at work, it will
eventually make every hour you spent miserable and eventually get to your
health.

Other than sleeping, work is what you spent the most time with for a
significant portion of your life.  If that is not fulfilling a core pillar
of what can provide happiness is not supporting you.  I have seen people
advocate for just not caring to fix the work aspect, instead to work less
and spend more free time.  I have not found that to work for me.  Work
needs to be fulfilling, even if work is just a few hours a day.

Dare To Commit
--------------

Life isn't about sampling everything; it’s about making deliberate choices
and committing to the ones that matter.  You don't need to date twenty
people to find the right partner, nor do you need a network of hundred
acquaintances to succeed.  Similarly, you don't need to work at ten
different companies to build a meaningful career.  Those things can be
hugely beneficial, don't get me wrong, but you can do more with less too.
When you focus on taking one step at a time, choosing the best option
available to you in that moment you can accomplish great things.  Feel
free to look to others for inspiration, but `do not to compare
</2023/2/9/everybody-is-complex/>`__ what they have versus what you don't.
Nothing good will come from that.  Everyone's journey is unique, shaped by
the opportunities they encounter and the paths they decide to follow.
Value grows not with the breadth of options explored but with the depth of
commitment to the path you've chosen.

Just as mastering a skill pays dividends, so does committing on your
personal or professional journey.  Even if the world around you shifts —
like the rise of AI in software engineering — your experience and
expertise aren't wasted.  Your gained experience makes it much easier for
you to adjust course and it will give you the necessary trust in yourself.
It allows to leverage what you've learned in new ways.  While it's true
that choosing from limited options might not always lead to the “best”
possible outcome, the time and effort you invest in your chosen path can
often outweigh the hypothetical gains of a different choice.  In many
cases, mastery and fulfillment come not from chasing endless possibilities
but from fully embracing the one path you're on and making it your own.

Date to Marry
-------------

To me this happened through a lucky accident but it's something I strongly
believe in.  I'm an agnostic, I don't hold strong religious beliefs but I
do believe in the purpose of and benefits of a lasting marriage.  When my
wife and I met I did not think I was in a position in my life where I had
interest, desire or necessity in a deep relationship, let alone to marry.
We did not live in the same country when we met and we had a long distance
relationship for almost a year.  That kind of relationship (particularly
when visa issues are involved) has one incredible benefit: you really have
to commit to your relationship.  It's expensive and you spend a lot of
time talking and sharing intimate thoughts.  It also forces you to make a
concious decision if the two of you believe it's worth continuing.  You
don't have the option to just “test drive” it.  It forces you to figure
out all the hard things upfront.  Career, values, ambitions, children, the
whole thing.  That's a very different experience to swiping right and see
what comes from it.

That one year of intensive dating changed me.  I started to recognize the
benefits of committing to something on a much deeper level.  It taught me
that vulnerability and opening yourself up can be a beautiful thing.  It
showed me that there was a whole part to myself I did not look into.  It
showed me that really committing to something, opens up a whole new world
of opportunity and it allowed us to really invest into our relationship.

When you commit to your partner fully you get a lot in the process.  Yes,
there are risks and while you're dating, you need to figure these things
out.  You need to know on a fundamental level that the person you're
dating is going to be the one you want to be with for a lifetime.  That's
not easy, because no human is perfect.  Yet if that is the goal, you can
poke at the parts where dragons can be.  Only in situations of stress and
challenge will you truly find out how the other person works and if that
works for you.

I have heard people talk about “going to IKEA” for a date.  I think that's
a brilliant idea.  Imagining a life together and struggling a bit through
conflict and resolution is exactly the right way to go about it.

Having Children
---------------

Very few things have so profoundly changed me as our first child.

Seeing children grow up is such a moving experience.  I enjoy being with
them in moments of achievements or sadness alike and I love when they
surprise me in the morning with their newfound wisdom or after school with
their proud achievements.  It's fun to play with them, to help them learn
new things and you can do things together you haven't done since your own
childhood.

I'm lucky to have kids.  I grew up in a society that has largely painted a
pretty dark picture about having children but I do not share those views.
We knew we wanted children and I'm glad we didn't wait.  You can't cheat
nature on this thing and at the present state of scientific development,
things still are much harder if you try to have children late.

Nothing will ever be perfect.  There were sleepless nights, there are the
sicknesses that come in autumn with daycare and school.  You need to
arrange things in different ways than you were used to.  You will hear a
lot from parents and educators about what is is like to have children but
the reality however is that I don't think it's possible to know how it
is to have kids until you do.  In a way you have to jump into the cold
water and there is no going back.

There are some important prerequisites though, but I think differently
about them now then I did before.  I don't think that you need a lot of
money or a stable career, but you need to have your marriage and house in
order.  The most important thing I learned about having children is that
you first and foremost need to take care of yourself.  Any stress you
experience, you will pass on to your children and it will harm them in the
process.  This is really important.  There are lots of dysfunctional
households and bad parents and you should not have children if you can't
take care of yourself.

Those are the important parts, but then there are superficial issues.  I
almost entirely opted out of reading parental advise books because I could
feel how they stress me out.  I found it easier to take on challenges as
they arrive naturally.  If you have a loving relationship with your spouse
you can extend that to your children and learn how to deal with challenges
calmly (or as calmly as you can).  You need to be there for each other.
Your children will not become more successful because you mastered breast
feeding on day one or if you taught them sign language before they can
talk.  They will however be significantly better off if you can jump on a
moment's notice to take care of your spouse or child when something goes
wrong.

Our experience is unlikely to be your experience, but there are some
things that are shared among parents.  You grow above yourself when all
the sudden become fully responsible for another human being and you can't
opt out of it.  It also invites you to reflect on yourself more and how
you came to be the person that you are.  I also don't think it makes you
any less ambitious, but it changes how you define success for yourself.
Your horizon opens up and it really makes you think more about the
totality of your family rather than yourself.

----

My life isn't about perfection or constantly chasing what's next; it's
about being present and committing to the things that matter.  This is
also what I'm passing on to my children.  Whatever your journey may look
like, I hope you find joy, purpose, and the courage to commit fully to it
and that you found something useful in my writings.
