public: yes
tags: [thoughts]
summary: |
  Something on the topic of money and privilege that come with working in
  software.

Be Humble
=========

2020 was a crazy and challenging year.  Millions of people lost their jobs
and thousands lost loved ones.  But not me.  Not just that, I work in an
industry where I can safely say that most of us didn't really have such a
terrible 2020 all things considered.  Yeah, the pandemic sucks and for
those of us with kids at home home office was challenging for sure.  But
really just compare that with the experience people have and had that are
not in such a privileged position.

And it's not just that programmers and IT folks in general had very little
to complain about when it comes to the pandemic, we're a really, really
privileged bunch *in general*.  We get preferred visa treatment which
makes us one of the most mobile work forces, our profession is universally
recognized even if we did not actually get a degree, we can work from home
and we're monetarily compensated in a way that even juniors coming from a
few month training will out-earn many studied professions.

With all that money come a lot of inflated egos.  This has always been a
weird thing but over the last year it has really started to annoy me how
tone deaf some folks are about their personal situation.  All that money
buys you a ton that many can only dream of.  You can use that money to
retire early, that money buys you the freedom to start your own company,
that money is often enough money to get more money from investors.

It's nice that people can do that, but the nonchalant way in which this is
presented online really starts to give my profession an awful reputation.
Some of you might think that it's great you are all angel investors and
serial entrepreneurs who work on dodgy immigration arrangements from
different places in the world, who network on the latest and greatest
social apps, share their lifestyle in their podcast armed with that fancy
latte and craft beer and who are making a brand out of themselves.

I just have one ask: when you do that, be humble and reflect on your
situation.  Most people are not `that lucky
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3LopI4YeC4I&t=70s>`__.
